# Summary

1. Some kind of intelligence is incorporated into DNA/RNA. I call it Natural Intelligence (NI). This NI is based upon a more than average susceptibility for specific mutations of certain trait-defining DNA-regions, possibly in relation with internal or external circumstances triggering these mutations. This leads to a more often than random number of variations in these regions and so to specific mutations with a higher frequency than according to the Evolution Theory. This susceptibility is transferable from generation to generation.
2. Therefor this NI implicates a specific evolutionary focus and so a directional evolution, with the capability of defining a species. I call these traits (potential) focused traits. (Almost) all species have one or more of these (potential) focused traits.
3. A potential focused trait becomes a focused trait when and if internal circumstances (‘survival of an internal fit’)  and external circumstances (‘survival of the fittest’ or ‘survival of another fit’) allow this.
4. Due to external circumstances and/or due to genetical processes, the susceptible regions, which define the (potential) focused traits, can change in an in evolutionary context abrupt process. If the, from these changes, resulting new or adjusted traits are positive and if they are inheritable and if there are compatible with existing traits, they can result in a better fit, the best fit or even another fit. This process is qualified as a revolutionary evolution. The result of this process can be a new (‘to be’) (family of) species.
5. Because of the more often than random mutations in the regions of the DNA, that determine the (potential) focused traits, evolution goes faster and more efficient than according to the Evolution Theory - which is based on 100% random variations - and so also makes it easier for the concerning species to widen the genetic distance to its ancestors with (partly) other focused traits, resulting in a higher success rate.
6. This directional evolution can also be restraining, meaning that certain mutations happen less than random or are even blocked. Also directional evolution may not be able to cope with sudden threats, if they are not within the scope of the (potential) focused trait(s) or of any regions in DNA that can, by switching on, bring a new (potential) focused trait if triggered by these threats. Random mutations according to the Evolution Theory could offer the change of survival in such a situation.
7. In the process of specification based on the Evolution Theory the genetic split is the end result of two isolated evolutions. In the process based on NI (and specifically on revolutionary evolution) this split is the start of two separate (but not by definition isolated) evolutions.
8. In combination with the evolution according to the Evolution Theory NI describes the evolution of life way better and complete than the Evolution Theory on its own. ET for instance brings in flexibility and the capacity to fill in tiny niches in the biosphere and NI brings in focus, complementarity and genetic distance between species.
9. Evolution, based on random mutations, concerns the non-focused traits and can offer the best fit in these context and can lead to a new species within a family of plants or animals. Revolutionary evolution can lead to a new family of plants or animals and may offer the only option to survive sudden changes with a decisive impact on the biosphere. ‘Survival of the fittest’ also determines if a mutation concerning a focused trait will be viable or not.
10. To make revolutionary evolution work, the basics of a new/changed trait, potentially defining the new species, already has to be present in the ancestors of this species, so it can be activated and/or made (potentially) ‘focused’ due to a mutation or a couple of mutations or any other genetic process.
11. It is even plausible that the basics of every primary trait that defines new (families of) species (breathing in water or on land, flying, being warm blooded, human intelligence etc.), were already present in the DNA of the first living cells. So the development of life is not only a process of small (and sometimes a bit bigger) evolutionary steps but also, and maybe even primarily, a process of waking up and switching on of regions of DNA that determine certain traits. I call this the ‘Excitatus Theory’.
12. Where the evolution of life and of species are, according to the Evolution Theory, based on two principles (random mutation and ‘survival of the fittest’), both are according to NI+ExT also based on not-random mutations, revolutionary evolution, mutations influencing each other (‘snow-ball-effect’) and traits working together to get a fundamental trait (‘package deal’). This more complex model of evolution not only has a check of the viability in the outside world (‘survival of the fittest) but also this check internal in the concerning species (‘survival of an internal fit’).
13. Evolution is not only a time consuming process because the right mutations have to happen (according to ET+NI) but also because these mutations have to happen at the right time. This implicates a process of tuning and fine-tuning inside every new species and between every new species and its surroundings.
14. The Evolution Theory in combination with Natural Intelligence and the Excitatus Theory can explain the results of recent researches way better than the Evolution Theory on its own.
15. Natural Intelligence can explain why there are so few fossils of transitional life forms.
16. Natural Intelligence can explain why genetic transitions, that demand 50 or so specific mutations to be effective, where each of them apart brings no better fit let alone a ‘survival of the fittest’, are still evolutionary possible and even realistic.
17. Mankind is not the result of a ‘simple’ evolution but of revolutionary evolution. Mankind does not belong to the family of primates but represents a family of species on its own.
18. Evolution based of NI together with ET gives a way more faster, more effective, more efficient and more complete filling of all biospheres on earth than evolution according to ET on its own will ever be able to accomplish.
19. Evolution and NI combined don’t only give direction to the evolution of individual species but even to the evolution of life as a whole. This direction is not only the result of the principle of ‘the survival of the fittest’, due to random and not random mutations, but also the result of the principles of ‘survival of an internal fit’ and of ‘the survival of another fit’. These principles implicate a more or less inevitable outcome of the evolution of life.
20. This outcome (or goal) of life is giving existence and purpose to the universe(1) and organizing and structuring as much materials as possible(2). Also the laws of physics organize the materials within the universe. So the theory that life is an organising feature is nothing but an expansion of these laws of physics. Nothing exotic or religious about it. 
21. Life and the evolution of life go against the second law of thermodynamics but do not contradict this law.
22. Mankind sees himself or herself as the end of the evolution for the time being. That could be true, not because we are likely the most intelligent of all creatures, but because we, yes thanks to this intelligence, organize and structure the most materials, not only in our body but also in our environment. In the future we will expand even expand this quality by bringing a the variety of species and so life to other planets. In order to do so we will have to bridge genetic distances that are even too big for ET + NI +ExT. So mankind will switch from a passive to an active role in the evolution of life.
23. NI makes the enigma of the evolution of life substantially smaller but the enigma of the origin of life not larger, if you consider the fact that according to the ET all traits, except the basic traits of life and reproduction, came out of nothing because of random mutations.
