# Final words

This it is for the moment. I am aware that there are a lot of assumptions, but it is nothing more than an effort to present a possible third way, somewhere between an evolution solely based on coincidences and an evolution dictated and controlled by a godlike creature. That a god caring about individual people does exist, has never been proven nor the Evolution Theory the way we interpret it nowadays. So I am not that far off with my theory. Of course religion has a history of many years and many believers and there are a lot of scientists that have proven or at least made it plausible that some parts of the Evolution Theory are more than just a theory. But anyway I hope you find my points of view interesting, maybe even a bit plausible, or some parts of it, and at least a reason to think it over and form your own opinion about it. And if you can agree with me, that if you don’t believe in god, it does not automatically imply that you are a follower of the Evolution Theory and the other way around that if you don’t believe that the Evolution Theory is the whole story, you must be a religious person, I think we already have something in common. And if I may boost a bit: I think my theory of NI+ExT (or maybe only parts of them) can explain things religion and the Evolution Theory can’t. In that respect I have no urge to include or exclude a system, or even a god, that influences our world, our lives, time and the universe.

If you have your own thoughts about it, if you can follow my thoughts or if you want to criticise my theory, if you think it contains flaws or mistakes or even think it is complete bullshit, please let me know. But please always with argumentations. Listening to you can only make me wiser. Your reactions could even be the start of the grow of a real third way of thinking about life and its evolution, that can be explored further in the near future.

 

Otto Kettlitz
